[Discuss] ADR about version mismatches (#1203)
mozilla/uniffi-rs: docs/adr/0007-preventing-version-mismatches.md

### Breaking changes to the UDL syntax

A related issue is breaking changes to the UDL syntax, for example the change the renamed `[Wrapped]` to `[Custom]`.
These kind of changes can lead to challenges with scaffolding and bindings generation.  For example, users could get
into a situtation where `uniffi-bindgen` can parse a UDL file, but `uniffi-bindgen-kotlin` can't.

However, this issue seems less important since a) the errors are easier to diagnose and fix and b) we have historically
only introduced breaking changes like this for "experimental" features like custom/wrapped types.

This ADR will ignore this issue and only focus on compatibility between the generated scaffolding and bindings code.

## Decision Drivers

- UniFFI should have a friendly developer experience.
  - If possible, developers shouldn't have to worry or know about this issue.
  - If that's not possible, then it should be easy for them to identify and fix the issue.
- We need to support external bindings generators and allow those projects to
  release new versions without coordinating with the UniFFI team.

## Considered Options

### **[Requirement] More flexible versioning**

> As mentioned in the context, once we have external bindings generators we can't rely on a simply compare it's version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in the context, once we have external bindings generators we can't rely on simply comparing its version
```

string to `uniffi`.  A more flexible versioning policy is a requirement for all other options discussed here.

> I think we can use semver for this:

Reviewer: Is this referring specifically to the version number of the `uniffi` crate, the bindings-generator crates, etc? Or, is it a separate version number specifically for the details of the FFI interface, shared between all the different crates in the ecosystem?

If the intent is to use the package version number for this, there may be a nontrivial risk of "false positive" version bumps, where we e.g. rev the major version number of `uniffi` because of some consumer-facing API change in the tooling or integration, causing incompatibility with bindings generators despite no actual change in the FFI layer.

Reviewer 2: Hey Ryan! I think the intent here was to use the crate versions, with the implication being that uniffi and the bindings would need to stay in a kind of lock-step regarding the major version number. You are correct that "false positives" would be likely in this scenario - I wonder if we can come up with examples of this, because I could imagine that many tooling or integration changes would indeed impact the bindings generators in some way even if they didn't change the ffi layer. Obviously there are cases where this wouldn't be true too.

A separate version for the ffi layer would be good, but then we couldn't rely on cargo - OTOH though, maybe that's not a big problem in practice - the fact that a human might need to determine the exact version of the "foo" bindings which interoperate with version x.y.z of uniffi might be ok.

>   - The major version is incremented whenever there's a change that would breaks compatibility between the bindings and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The major version is incremented whenever there's a change that would break compatibility between the bindings and
```

    scaffolding generation code. Changing the layout of `RustBuffer` or `RustCallStatus` would be a breaking change. Our

>     custom/external types work would not.

Reviewer: To make this workable, I think we'd need to generate an explicit list of the things that can cause a breaking change (Probably we'd fail to enumerate all of them on a first attempt, but it's worth attempting anyway).

Reviewer 2: That's a very good point, and I wonder if identifying this might help to get to the crux of what we are trying to solve here.

    bump these?
  - The patch version is incremented for non-breaking, bugfix, releases.

This means that `uniffi-bindgen` and all external bindgen tools are compatible with `uniffi` if their major versions
match.  We would update `ComponentInterface` so it only uses the major version number when calculating it's hash.

Pros:
  - Seems like a hard requirement if we want external bindings tools
  - Would significantly reduce the chance of running into a version mismatch.
  - Makes it easier to detect version mismatches when parsing `Cargo.toml`. Right now we need to determine the exact
    version that was resolved and stored in `Cargo.lock`.  If we only needed to compare the major versions, then we
    could use the specification from `Cargo.toml` directly.

Cons
  - We would have to be more careful with breaking changes. If we realized a change would break the generated code
    compatibility, then that change might need to wait before releasing it. If we didn't realize a change would break
    the generated code compatilibity and released the change anyway, then we've introduced undefined behavior in all

>     consumer code.

Reviewer: As part of implementing this change, we would remove the version number from the calculation of the `ComponentInterface` fingerprint, instead depending on orchestration of the build process to detect and prevent version mismatches?

Reviewer 2: Assuming the above, where the major version of uniffi and the binding must match, the intent would be to only use that major version for this.

  from bindgen tools.  Each one of these commands would become a clap subcommand.
- Tell UniFFI users to create a new crate in their workspace with for their bindgen binary.  The code would look
  something like this:

```
fn main() {
    uniffi_bindgen::run_bindgen_app(vec![
       uniffi_bindgen_language1::clap_command(),
       uniffi_bindgen_language2::clap_command(),
       uniffi_bindgen_language3::clap_command(),
       ...
    ])
}
```

Support for each languages could be behind feature gates, as in `[1]`.  However, libraries could also choose to define a
preferred set of languages and require that consumers create their own bindgen crates if they want a different set. For
example, application-services might have a bindgen crate that supports Kotlin and Swift and moz-central could consume
the application-services components, but use a bindgen crate that supports JS.

Pros:
  - Doesn't rely on a system-wide install of `uniffi-bindgen`.
  - Bindgen tool versions are specified in a `Cargo.toml`.
  - Doesn't require building the main library to generate bindings.

>   - Allows libraries consumers to define their own bindgen crates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Allows library consumers to define their own bindgen crates.
```

  - Users specify their bindgen tool version in the `uniffi.toml` bindings config
  - We update `uniffi-bindgen` to run the bindgen tool specified in `uniffi.toml`.  `uniffi-bindgen generate [language]`
    would:
    - Lookup the bindgen tool version from `uniffi.toml` for `[language]`
    - Installs that version of the tool inside the `target` directory ( `cargo install --root target/uniffi --version
      X.Y.Z uniffi_bindgen_[language]`). We should also store the installed versions and avoid trying to re-install if
      the version hasn't changed
    - Runs `target/uniffi/uniffi_bindgen_language` and passes it all additional args from the command line.

Pros:
  - Doesn't rely on a system-wide install of `uniffi-bindgen`.
  - Doesn't require building the main library to generate bindings.
  - Doesn't require any additional crates.

Cons:
  - Requires the most amount of work on our part.
  - Specifying versions in `uniffi.toml` as well as `Cargo.toml` could be confusing.
  - If a library consumer wanted to generate bindings for a language that wasn't specified in `uniffi.toml`, then they
    would need to manage the installed binary themselves.

> 

Reviewer: Trying to think of other ways out of this bind...I wonder what it would look like to declare a uniffi version number in the `.udl` file itself. Syntax would be fiddly as always, but I'm imagining something  like:

```
[UniFFI=1.1]
namespace my_example {
   ...
}
```

This would be clunky and annoying, but it's putting the information in the one place that every component of the system has to look. If you try to generate the scaffolding with an incompatible version of UniFFI, it can detect this and generate a clean helpful error. If you try to generate bindings with an incompatible version of the tool, it can detect this and generate a clean helpful error.

In terms of the goals of the ADR, this would punt entirely on "If possible, developers shouldn't have to worry or know about this issue" because in fact they would have to know about it *more*. But it would let us to a much better job of "If that's not possible, then it should be easy for them to identify and fix the issue". In fact the completely custom error message could direct the user to a page in the manual with tips about how to keep the versions of their tools in sync.

You could treat this version number as the version of UniFFI itself, or as a separate and less-frequently-updated version number that is specifically *the version of UDL* rather than of any particular tool.

Reviewer 2: This is an interesting idea, particularly if we can decouple the crate version from the "ffi version". Ben and I were also chatting about how the existing mechanism seems to have saved us approximately zero times, mainly because of the way app-services ensures the versions match via the intermediate tool - so we were trying to think of a way to kill this entirely in a "safe enough" way - but haven't quite come up with anything yet :)

Author: If we decouple the crate version from the FFI version, then something like this seems like a great idea. It simplifies the task of explaining to devs which versions of uniffi are compatible with which versions of the bindgen tools.  I also think the concept of a UDL syntax version would have been nice as we were working through the wrapped/custom types code.  In hindsight it seems like we didn't have a great language to discuss the changes we were making.

Another way to handle this would be to have `uniffi_build` generate some sort of intermediate artifact that includes the version.  In addition to writing `[component].uniffi.rs` to the out dir, it would also serialize the `ComponentInterface` and write it out to the target dir.  The bindgen tool would input that, check the version, then write out its bindings.

I'm not sure if this is better or worse.  Users wouldn't specify the version in the UDL file.  That makes it easier to get started,  but having that version implicit might make compatibility issues harder to understand.

One reason I'm thinking about this is that Mark brought up replacing the UDL file with a macro.  In that world, we might want to do the serialization anyways to avoid having to parse the Rust source tree for each bindings language.

Reviewer: > Another way to handle this would be to have uniffi_build generate some sort of intermediate artifact that includes
> the version. 

I like to use WebAssembly Interface Types and wasm-bindgen as a touch-point here. In that case, compiling the Rust code produces both the compiled code, and a binary "interface definition" which can then be processed by downstream tools. It seems like a really nice workable model, and you can imagine the UDL as a kinda of temporary hand-written version of that interface definition.

(In the wasm-bindgen case, the definition is actually generated as an additional custom section of the compiled library, not as a separate artifact, which I think is really neat and makes it less likely for build system shenanigans to accidentally use a mis-matched `.so` and interface face...but may be a bit much mucking around for our purposes here).

### **[Option 1] generate bindings in `build.rs`**

As mentioned in the context, we handle this issue for scaffolding by using the
`builtin-bindgen` feature of `uniffi_build`.  If we also generated the bindings
code in `build.rs`, we could use a similar system:

- The Rust crate adds a dependency to each bindings generator they want to
  use (`uniffi-bindgen-kotlin = 1.10.1`, `uniffi-bindgen-swift = 1.4.0`,
  etc).
- Each bindings generator defines a `generate_bindings()` function, which
  generates the bindings and writes them to the `target/[language]` directory.
- We call this in `build.rs`:

```
fn main() {
  uniffi_bindgen_language1.generate_bindings();
  uniffi_bindgen_language2.generate_bindings();
  ...
}
```

- The build scripts would then copy the bindings from that directory to the
  final location.

Pros:
  - Doesn't rely on a system-wide install of `uniffi-bindgen`.
  - Bindgen tool versions are specified in the `Cargo.toml`, alongside the
    `uniffi` version.

Cons:
  - Forces a specific order to the build process.  If you try building the
    bindings before the Rust component, it would fail since the source files

>     haven't been generated yet (or worse, succeed with stale code).

Reviewer 2: it's worth thinking about this in a future where .udl files didn't exist and macros are used - that world might make this less of a problem and possibly even a feature? eg, assuming foreign bindings need to parse rust code, it might actually be a build time benefit to generating all bindings at the same time from the same parse tree?

[ok, I've now moved from "thinking out loud" to "making things up" :]

  - Hard to make this work with downstream crates.  For the desktop JS example,
    the app-services components would need to include a call to
    `uniffi_bindgen_gecko_js.generate_bindings()` in the `build.rs` file which
    is not ideal.  Also, it would generate Kotlin/Swift bindings, which aren't
    needed.  I think the solution would be to create a feature gate for each
    bindings language that we could enable/disable, but this seems overly
    complex.  Even this solution wouldn't work for some 3rd-party cases, for

>     example a 3rd-party that wants to use their home-grown bindings generator.

Reviewer 2: I'm not convinced features would be bad fit here TBH. I suspect that we are going to end up feature-gating stuff based on the platform anyway (eg, sync code is likely to be different at the very least)

(to be clear, I'm not advocating for this as the accepted solution, but I think this as worded overstates this con)

Author: Agreed.  I reworded this section.  It's still listed as a con, but it's emphasized less.

- Require each bindgen tool to expose a `clap_command()` function that returns
  a `clap::Command` instance.
- Create a `uniffi_bindgen::run_bindgen_app` function that executes a CLI app
  from a list of `clap::Command` instances from bindgen tools.  Each one of
  these commands would become a clap subcommand.
- Tell UniFFI users to create a new crate in their workspace with a bindgen
  binary.  The code would look something like this:

```
fn main() {
    uniffi_bindgen::run_bindgen_app(vec![
       uniffi_bindgen_language1::clap_command(),
       uniffi_bindgen_language2::clap_command(),
       uniffi_bindgen_language3::clap_command(),
       ...
    ])
}
```

Pros:
  - Doesn't rely on a system-wide install of `uniffi-bindgen`.
  - Bindgen tool versions are specified in the `Cargo.toml`, alongside the
    `uniffi` version.
  - Doesn't require building the main library to generate bindings.
  - Supports in the downstream crate scenario.  If we take the moz-central
    example from above, it would create it's own bindgen crate that only
    generated `gecko-js` bindings, and that crate could generate bindings for
    the app-services UDL files.

> 

Reviewer 2: can we formalize the app-services code inside the uniffi repo in some way? We'd need to get creative, but feature gates might mean uniffi helps support all "known" bindings, even for bindings not in our repo, or something hand-wavey.

(I guess I'm thinking that some of the cons below might not necessarily be as bad as they look on paper - eg, #1190 has a similar work-around. OTOH, maybe the burden is small enough once a consumer becomes "sophisticated" enough, but it might be a large hurdle for new uniffi users who are just investigating it and are you to commit)

Cons:
  - Extra boilerplate to create the bindgen crate.
  - Some libraries don't use workspaces, we would be forcing them to switch to
    using workspaces.  Note though, that users wouldn't have to drastically
    change their project layout.  They could keep their existing crate in the
    same place and make it a [root package](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/workspaces.html#root-package).

### **[Option 3] Tool to manage UniFFI installed versions**

> We create a tool that managed the bindgen binaries ourselves.

Reviewer 2: nano-nit s/managed/manages/

  - Users specify their bindgen tool version in the `uniffi.toml` bindings config
  - We update `uniffi-bindgen` to run the bindgen tool specified in
    `uniffi.toml`.  `uniffi-bindgen generate [language]` would:
    - Lookup the bindgen tool version from `uniffi.toml` for `[language]`
    - Installs that version of the tool inside the `target` directory (
      `cargo install --root target/uniffi --version X.Y.Z uniffi_bindgen_[language]`).
      We should also store the installed versions and avoid trying to
      re-install if the version hasn't changed
    - Runs `target/uniffi/uniffi_bindgen_language` and passes it all additional args from the command line.

Pros:
  - Doesn't rely on a system-wide install of `uniffi-bindgen`.
  - Doesn't require building the main library to generate bindings.
  - Doesn't require any additional crates.

Cons:
  - Requires the most amount of work on our part.

>   - Specifying versions in `uniffi.toml` rather than `Cargo.toml` could be confusing.

Reviewer 2: it would need to be in both, at least for `uniffi` itself?
